Yes, good morning. Yeah, good morning. Now, we've got 10 minutes for 10.
Okay, so we start, right? Yes, please. Okay, so, Kia ora, everybody. My name is Cosmo Geoffrey.
I'm currently the President of the Hantemri Howard League for Penal Reform, and with me today
is Buster Thompson, our Secretary. As we stated in our written submission, the Howard League has been
advocating for penal reform for over 100 years. While we primarily engage in advocating for reform
related to prisons, we also pride ourselves on promoting an evidence-based consideration
of all proposed legislation that relates to justice and civil liberty. We are aware that there are
other organisations who provided much more detailed submissions on this topic. The Howard
League would like to support those organisations in submitting that we impose the needless expansion
of police powers. We believe we should be strengthening privacy laws rather than weakening
them. More especially, when it was revealed that over 50% of those images taken by the police
were persons of Maori and Pacifica descent. As an organisation, the Howard League is confronted
daily by the inherent discrimination that is rife within our justice system. Polynesian and Maori
people are totally over-represented in all the cohorts we advocate for the New Zealand justice
system. And the police are no exception. More Maori and Pacifica people are stopped, apprehended,
arrested, tried in our courts, and imprisoned by a factor of at least three times compared to
Pacifica subjects. Considering the disproportionate impact this will have on Maori, we think that
more effort is required to work with Maori and Maori organisations in developing legislation
related to the collection and storage of information. Consequently, the Howard League urges
the Justice Committee to take a breath and consider fully the implications of this legislation.
In preparing our submission, we basically decided that it's easy to criticise, anyone can criticise,
but what we want to do is try and provide some answers. So we researched what other European
jurisdictions do in basically managing public surveillance and storage of collected data.
And what we found was really interesting. Most of the countries in the European Union have signed
up, in fact all of them as far as we can work out have signed up to the GDPR. I didn't know what
this was either, but it's the General Data Protection Regulation. So they all sign up to the General Data
Protection Regulation and this sets strict regulations which control the surveillance
and storage of people in public places. For example, there's a proportionality requirement.
Police cannot indiscriminately photograph the entire population. The collection of biometric
data is prohibited in principle, but if permitted, if it's strictly necessary,
it must be proportionate for investigating specific crimes or maintaining security.
The storage and retirement. The EU allows the retention of biometric data of suspects and
convicts, but national laws must set appropriate time limits for the reviewing and the need to
store that data. For example, in most European countries, if any of the people whose images
are taken and stored do not offend in the next 12 months, that data is deleted. And that's what
we believe should happen in New Zealand. We could outline this in much greater detail,
but to be truthful, the Parliamentary Committee, the Justice Committee and you guys generally
have much more efficient and capable research people who can provide this information. We don't
need to reinvent the wheel. There are basically instructions and institutions in place that deal
this sort of thing. Why should we be starting out from scratch and having a carte blanche system
where people can be willingly recorded and data stored infinitely? We believe that a body such
as the Privacy Commissioner should be set up to oversee this legislation and be responsible
for the taking and storage of images in the public. If those people do not offend for the
next 12 months, then that data should be deleted. That makes sense. There needs to be a clear purpose
for why police are taking photos of someone rather than a vague possible future purpose.
Otherwise, effectively, anyone's photo can be taken by the police indiscriminately and stored forever.
We believe this not to be a fair and reasonable situation and we want it to be controlled.
That's our oral submission and we could answer any questions if there were any.
Hey Bill, thank you very much. Hon Dr Duncan Webb.
Kia ora Cosmo and Buster. Thanks for all the work that you do.
Look, I guess most people would accept that if a police are investigating a crime or
something they know as planned as a crime that surveillance and photographs is probably just
ifiable. Do you have any comments on them taking photographs where they are really just
gathering information about the behaviours of people that they know are part of criminal networks
rather than investigating a particular crime or proposed crime?
Well, our view is that, guys, it should be for a particular purpose in that it should be to
investigate a crime rather than just otherwise you get this risk of investigating people who
they consider associates but are not actually committing any offences. I think it goes too far
to be investigating or taking photos of this biometric information of people who are not
actively involved in a crime. Thanks, Bill. Just personally, I don't know if this helps, but
it's no secret that I have been in prison. It was over 25 years ago. I was down in Twizel
the other day and I got stopped by the police on my jocati and he asked my license. Within seconds,
he brought up my history, started talking about something that happened 25 years ago,
and I was left standing there wondering, haven't I done time? Shouldn't I be allowed to get on
with my life? And I'm just wary of collecting information on people that can be called up
within seconds and used against them when it doesn't relate to the whole idea of taking images of people.
All right. Well, thank you for sharing that, particularly that your last personal comment,
which was very interesting. And both of you this morning joining us on this submission. So,
thanks for your time. Right, now we're going to go to the news. No other questions I take it?
No. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you very much, Cosmo. Right, we're going to go to the
Royal Association of New Zealand. And hopefully we've got a couple of people. Jacob Perry's there,
I see. And maybe Lloyd Gallagher. If you're free, please join us.
Do we have Lloyd? Yeah. Lloyd is there, but he's on mute.
All right. Well, that's all right. I can, I can speak on what's half.
All right. We've got 10 minutes with you. So please leave a little bit of time for questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Good morning. So yes, I'm Jacob Perry, appearing with me as Mr Lloyd Gallagher.
We're appearing on behalf of the Law Association's Technology and Law Committee.
And thank you for giving us the opportunity to appear this morning.
I won't re-tread the written submissions that we have filed, but this morning I just wanted to touch
on three points. Firstly, whether or not this bill, as it is, directly responds to the issue
which it sets out to address. I want to make some comments on the scope and threshold
provisions in the bill. And then also some general comments about the technological context
in which this is occurring. And I suppose at the outset, I just want to be clear that or be clear
that we acknowledge the underlying legislative objective here. So the Supreme Court decision
in Tamifuna and before that the IPCA, Privacy Commissioner, Joint Inquiry, there is uncertainty
arising out of that. And there is a need for a clear basis for information collection.
What we want to ensure is that in addressing this issue, we don't end up with either further
uncertainty or finding that we address the issue in a way that is inconsistent with
individuals' reasonable expectations of privacy. So the first point I wanted to make
was just linking this back to where we've come from with the Supreme Court decision in
Tamifuna. Now that decision didn't simply say police can't take photos in public.
It turns on a lot more than that. There's taking the image, identifying the person,
retaining the image for intelligence use without any defined purpose and without any
framework behind it for retention or oversight, destruction, et cetera.
The cabinet paper which preceded this bill specifically referenced the judgment of Justice
Koch in Tamifuna. And in that judgment, His Honour said that what was needed was obviously
some sort of statutory authority for this, but also a clear framework for retention,
use and destruction. And there was a comment that the limits and the broad framework for
any such database should be determined by Parliament by amendment of the Policing Act.
So the bill that we have now inserts collection powers, but it doesn't do those other things.
It doesn't give us a framework after that for retention and use and destruction. And that's
the really, really important part here, which I think with the bill is a structural problem.
The importance when it comes to privacy rights, the importance is the use.
I think initially in relation to this bill, it was anticipated that we would account for this
by including some sort of regulation making power, but that doesn't seem to have carried through to
the bill itself. And I'm not 100% sure why that is, but that could have been one of the ways in which
this was addressed. So that's point number one from our submissions is that
some thought needs to go into what the framework after collection of data looks like and how that
is going to be implemented. So if there's authority to collect it, what restrictions are
there going to be on its further use? The second point that I wanted to address,
which I think is set out in more detail in our written submissions, but just the threshold and
scope of collection powers that we're dealing with here are broad. So we have section 45a,
which gives us our purposes, some specified purposes, but also any other lawful purpose
connected with functions or activities of the police. Now, when you pair that with the threshold
in section 45d, because this purpose is open-ended, our concern is that it leads to a risk of
indiscriminate collection without a clearly defined purpose, which is the same concern that
was being echoed in Timofuna and before that the joint inquiry. 45d, which I just referenced,
sets the threshold for intelligence collection and at the moment it is or it could be used
in a vague way. So the information will or may support police functions or activities. So
that just on its face that could support or sorry, could permit collection on a purely speculative
basis. So well, this might be useful in the future, but I don't have any real reason to collect it
right now. So there's a threshold issue in our view. And the third point I wanted to make
on the provisions was just about continuous recording of sound and video solely for intelligence
purposes. Now in the bill, this is subject to a reasonableness test, but I do note that in the
cabinet paper that continuous recording for intelligence purposes was not intended to be
included. And it's unclear why the bill has, I suppose, taken a different direction.
So our submission, well on that at least, if there is going to be an authority for continuous
intelligence only recording, then needs to be a framework around that. So what sort of duration
medium is anticipated? Who can authorize this? Is this going to be going to be reviewed? Can it be
how long can it be held? These sorts of things. I realize I'm whipping through my time here, but
so the third point that I'll make is I think more of a general one, which has to do with the
technological context in which all of this is occurring. So not just police technology or
technology in New Zealand and globally at the moment is enabling a greater use of mass data
and it's moving at quite a fast pace. If we are introducing broad collection powers without
a framework that governs future use of data and retention, the practical effect is we're
going to vastly expand the volume of information being put into databases. And we may not
currently know or even anticipate the use that it's going to be put to. There was a comment that came
from the Supreme Court in Tamewhuna that advances in technology may transform the practical effect of
otherwise familiar police practices. So intelligence notings are familiar, commonplace police activity,
but the modern version of that which we seem to be looking at is including
much larger massive amounts of personal information being pushed into police databases
and the ability to use and analyze it at scale that is not clear to us at present.
So that's the overall point being I think how the start is going to be used. Actually I can
stop this. We've got Dr Lawrence Sunan got a question for you.
Thanks Chair Kiota, can you hear me? Yes. Cool. Just on the data front I'm really interested
to know also if you've done any work around how that data can be shared with agencies overseas.
Are you all familiar with Migrant 5? I'm not. I don't know if Lloyd might.
Yeah I'll jump in on this one. Going from there can you see potentially data like this being used
by other countries? Yeah look we've already seen some of the work that I'm doing with Curtin
University and my PhD around AI and the risks of AI as well is we've already seen the risks of
data being able to be collated and compared and then feed between an AI to another AI and simply
data breach risks that are around that. The amount of data that we're looking to collect here and
the general risk for public information that is required under different official information
acts and all those sort of acts as well as the confidentiality to require some of it to be
withheld there is always a general risk of how that data is going to be shared and released in
long-term ventures especially with the technology and how it's developing. One of the other risks
is with the collaboration that we're now doing with FBI etc internationally we run a risk of that
information no longer being able to be within our control. Once it's in the US's hands under
the Patriot Act etc there's a massive amount of risk of that data being put into databases
and miscommunicated along different areas. We saw the new AI acts that are coming in that
are sort of being floated around America at the moment where one agency is able to provide
that information to another agency, Microsoft is able to use it for other purposes under the
terms and conditions. It creates a minefield for potential risk and inappropriate use of
this information and that's why we think there should be limits on it.
Right Honorable Dr Duckham Webb.
Thanks for your look. Little less technical than Lawrence but look I'm interested in whether
you think in terms of legitimate collection of information there is a tenable way to frame
intelligence gathering rather than investigation because it seems to be one of the things that
we're really struggling with. We all accept that gathering data for investigations is one thing
but it's this loose kind of concept of being able to go about and collect intelligence which seems
to be hard to pin down. Well that's one of the risks that we've always had is that the
intelligence side of things is always about the potential for misuse of behavior in the future.
So we have a whole security system and securities act around collecting that sort of intelligence.
Then we're talking about generally collecting ordinary people's information in the general
public. They're not quite in my opinion they're not quite the same thing because what we do for
intelligence collection really has a lot of frameworks around that and a bit more broader
approach whereas what we talked about in general public when you're walking down the street is
more around the protection of an individual where there is no potential crime that may be one in
the future. So this comes back to the same sort of arguments we had with DNA testing in the early
years where how long do you keep DNA information? Is it for a potential rape or abuse in the
future? And we issued the limits on that information B and rightly pointed out by some
others GDPR does put some limitations on that and in my opinion I think we should follow that
same sort of approach because it does create that better balance. Jacob did you have anything to add to
that? No no I just think that even if we're talking about general intelligence purposes
I think we have to start from a place where we have a framework around you know how long
well for what purposes it's going to be used data is going to be used for
and that's really the big problem with the bill at the moment is that it's just
it's left a big blank space in there and it is a tricky question I acknowledge the
question but the answer to that question isn't leaving the answer blank.
All right hey guys we've gone over time but very good submission and drew out some points that we
haven't heard before so thank you for both of you for coming on this morning. Thank you we're
going to Caroline Young from the Retail New Zealand hopefully Caroline said good morning you've
turned up in person and we're not there with you this morning. Hey good hey lovely to see you
again looking forward to hearing what you want to say. Thank you very much and just introduce my
colleague. I'm Denise Powell and I'm the Epixie Minister of Retail NZ. Thank you very much for
the time to chat this morning we in principle support the bill. What there is a small exception
as has been heard in the previous two submissions what we'd say in terms of retailers that
the majority of New Zealanders would be walking through a retail store at least once a week or once
a fortnight across New Zealand. We have a high degree of recidivist offending in retail where
people are coming back again and again and again and we know that retail crime is a
significant problem. We want to ensure that police have the right tools in order to be able
to capture offenders and then obviously send them through the justice system in a way in which
they'll get charged and in a way that will be meaningful. But we do agree with the prior
two submissions that you know we need to ensure that there's the right controls that are sitting
in place for you know the framework of any collection of data. We sit here believing
that the police do a really great job and that they are collecting information for the right reasons.
We would start at a not at the lowest common denominator in a space that's starting to say
on the position that we believe they do the right work. We need to give them the right tools that
needs to be the right framework and have the right protections including you know they need to comply
to privacy as much as anybody else and proportionality also needs to comply. You know and we would think
smarter people than us would be able to look into what's overseas that we could learn from
you know they did talk about the general data protection regulation in Europe you know maybe
that's something that someone could look into but but as long as we've got the right framework
and protections to ensure that people are protected we believe that police need the tools to do the job
they would be the key things for our perspective. And what about the expanding the road closures
you're happy with all that? The road closures yes the expansion of the road closure powers we think
again police need to be able to have the right tools in place to be able to keep our
communities safe from harm and whether that is in terms of being able to give out fines and have
the correct penalties in place to ensure that police can close off roads when required and
stop people from from going into those areas when it is not a safe environment for them to be
to be in we're we're generally supportive again of that. I'll just add just in a retail environment
you know we're seeing guns presented at store these days so it's not just machetes and knives and
and other weapons but we're seeing people turn up with guns and when those situations happen you
know we get quick response from police they need to be able to call knife areas and make sure
that no one else comes into those public spaces because retail environments are a sort of a
pseudo public space where you've generally got free entry into so having those controls to close
off areas to ensure that our communities are safe are really important. All right good right members
questions. Just in terms of your most retailers in terms of this storage I see you support that
I see that you support police being able to record in private premises such as a retail
store so I presume that's what you mean by that. What's the norm for retailers in terms of collecting
images particularly video images in a shop or whatever what is there a norm around that?
I would say 99 percent of retailers have CCTV and there's you know wide use of CCTV
CCTV across retail you know multiples cameras throughout store people should be checking
those things and they're compliant to legislation around how long they need to hold on how long they
can hold on to that information for and police you know being able to come back into store I
for instance happen to be able to review tape is important it's something like a 30 or 60 day
something that I don't actually have that time on the tip of my tongue I'm sorry but it is a
much longer period of time than say for example facial recognition where you know if a retailer
is using that it's deleted within a minute hope it being collected. Okay right Camilla,
Village? Yeah just to follow up supplementary to the chair's question I just wanted to know
with the obviously I understand the vast majority of retailers will be very compliant with providing
the CCTV footage but in those instances where that isn't available in the in the store or for
some reason not made available this bill may allow the ongoing surveillance outside a retail store
even if that is considered a private place that's visible publicly and obviously with retail stores
that might be more likely to be visible publicly than in other private places and so is that
something that you've consulted any of your members on in terms of your support for that
ongoing surveillance or is that is it more of the provision of CCTV so you wouldn't imagine that would
be utilized in many instances? There's probably two answers to that question the first piece I'll go
with in terms of member feedback look we've had members come to us and we had a with
Privacy Commission and with the police commissioner and have asked them can we share or can police
share their watch list or some of their people that they're most worried about with the retailers
watch lists if they've got FRT so that we can make sure we can keep our stores safe so some retailers
are really open about being able to have police insert data into their space obviously at the moment
that you can't do that but I would also expect as a second point would be that we would if
police are wanting to put in place I guess you'd call it surveillance for want of a better word
we would expect that there would be adequate reasoning that sits in behind that and purpose for
it so it's not just a we're not just surveilling the whole country for you know for anything but
there's actually specific reasons to understand why someone would be coming to that space on a
regular basis and is undertaking something that would be viewed to be illegal and will lead
them to prosecution down the line so there would have to be something substantive to it.
All right hey thank you Caroline and Denise for your presentation nice to see you again.
Nice to see you. Thanks. Right now we've got Anjum Raiman who I see you are there.
As-Salaamu Alaykum. Good morning. We've got five minutes with you.
Welcome Salam. I'm presenting as not as an expert but just as a member of the public
and in my written submission I talked about the oversurbalance of our communities which was
effect up to at least May 2018 per the Royal Commission of Inquiry report on the
Christchurch Mosque terrorist attacks and you know in this instance and for some of the powers in
this bill what we're looking at is young Maori men who were the target of over surveillance
and over surveillance is part of over securitisation and is not the most effective way to reduce
crime. We saw after the Christchurch Mosque attacks a securitisation of mosques with surveillance
cameras and various other measures in place but I don't believe that is what would make the mosque
safer if anyone was so inclined they'd just kill people as they came out onto the street.
Do we then securitise the whole society? In the US if we take that instance as an example
where they have so much securitisation of shops you know glass brunts you can't interact with people
directly the things that are happening in schools for our kids their kids sorry having to do drills
and all these kinds of things but it hasn't really you know resulted in lower gun related deaths
so what I'm saying is that prevention efforts are much more effective and better worth our
resources and I do want to acknowledge the support of the New Zealand police after the
Christchurch Mosque attacks and that my submissions are presented with the utmost respect for that
support and on the same theme of over surveillance and securitisation this bill potentially removes
the right to political protest and the law commission have laid out their concerns in this
regard and if we look at what is happening overseas our concerns or my concerns are that
this kind of thing could start to happen here so for example in the UK we're seeing the
criminalisation of elderly pacifists through the use of terrorism laws and incidences where there's
no lies we're lost we've seen over overriding of basic protection so for example some of those
people that have been tried around damaging military assets the jury that has been making
decisions are not allowed to know that if they convert them or if they find them guilty that
they will be sentenced under terrorism laws and not just laws related to vandalism of property
I mean this kind of overreach is incredibly scary and that's what slippery slopes are about
when we look at what's happening across the ditch in Australia and the banning of one of
the states of the term global and to father and we're not seeing the defenders of free speech
coming out protecting against the criminalisation of a term of protest against theft of land loss
of life access to health education and more within our context yes there's a particular
religious group that comes out to harass other religious communities and other communities
that protest who misuse the Haka they always target minority groups and not the majority
and I want to offer my solidarity to the Sikh community who are the latest targets
the answer is not to change the law in a way that could stifle political protest against state
terrorism against the killing of tens of thousands of children against illegal wars when there was
never an imminent threat and I could be talking about the illegal invasion of Iraq more than
20 years ago the illegal bombing of Iran and citizens and school girls this year
discrimination and others previous speakers have talked had talked about automated decision-making
AI algorithms machine learning and as AI is increasingly used in state agencies
there is not enough scrutiny and there is no effective regulation of how that data is going
to be used and the ongoing effect but I had more to say but I think other speakers had come
that much better than I could and so the powers in this bill are going to make that worse and in
the space and around AI and platform regulation there is a lack of effective regulation overall
as it is and what protections there are and now starting to be dismantled and we see that with
the BSA being taken away but even if there was no discrimination the collection and holding of data
by the state in this manner was so little safeguard is an overreach and you know investing in
adequate food secure housing and warm housing education health social cohesion
all of that would solve these problems so much more effectively than what is proposed in this
bill thank you all right hey thank you for your submission we're well over time but I didn't want
to interrupt you um because I thought what you had to say was very important but I'm pushing more
have to move on but thank you for coming on this morning and making your thoughts known to the
committee right now we're going to uh professor uh goodness carer I think I saw you uh on if you'd
like to join us that would be fantastic we've got uh 10 minutes with you professor are you available
I think you've got your mute on
there we are good good morning professor yes good morning uh Mr chair thank you for the opportunity
to to present on this in a personal capacity um I just want to clarify that um my role I'm an
academic at the University of Auckland I have for decades been researching and teaching and publishing
in privacy law um but I'm also a past chair and currently the co-convener of the privacy foundations
surveillance sorry I'll just start my video I just realized apologies for that
yes so um just um I'm the co-convener of the privacy foundations surveillance working group
however I'm not speaking to you this morning in that role I think the foundation is making a
submission on its own account so I'm speaking purely as a as a privacy observer and commentator
and academic um and I um for the record I completely support the privacy foundations position we have
completely opposed the bill we've taken a in principle view that we oppose the bill and that
is also my my position um however I want to address um and I oppose both part one and part two
but I want to speak specifically to some specifics of part one on the basis that you know if it does
go ahead then I would like to see some specific safeguards and these relate to things like
clarifying the relationship they're largely of a technical nature clarifying the relationship
between the bill the amendment bill and the privacy act and the biometric processing privacy code
but I want to start this morning by saying by dispelling the notion there's a public you know
that people might have the idea that somehow if the police take pictures in public places and even
on private property it's the same as you or me you're taking a photo of members of the public
there's a huge difference between you or you or I taking a photo and the police because the police
then retain that picture that photo that image goes into a database and it can be used in a way
perhaps years later or months or years later that has serious effects on the freedom of the
individual concern whereas if you and I take a photo of somebody you know we don't have the
power to later on go and arrest them or or detain them or prevent them getting a job if
there's a police vetting inquiry so these these are the kinds of distinctions that I think need
to be made there's also the concern of what I see is mission creep and I think some of your
previous speakers have hinted at this I have also heard rumors about the migration five and
I'm currently working in fact I have written a piece on this happy to make that available to the
committee on the the proposal by the current consultation with the board of protection
authorities with Homeland Security in the United States where to get our visa waiver status
the United States is insisting on access direct access to other countries
law enforcement databases and and that is to me very concerning I see there's a question
no no you finished yeah so yeah so yeah so that's so that is a concern and and we have
examples previously of of American companies like Clearview once they get access to these images
they go in public databases and it's very difficult to then you know get get them deleted
I want to speak very quickly about the difference between biometric information which this bill
authorizes and other forms of biographical information there is a big difference in the age
of AI and in the age of facial recognition images are very different from a police
constable taking a note in his or her notebook images can identify people instantly
be matched be stored in databases and and and have a much more significant potential
you know your face is your face you cannot really get a new face if somebody hacks into it and
there's no guarantee for the police or anybody for that matter that these images won't end up for
example on on the dark web or eventually you know there's a hack or something like that
but I want to also talk about the the over wide definitions such as
policing intelligence intelligence or other lawful purposes integrity of policing
these purposes are currently defined very broadly in section nine of the act and they are so broad
as to potentially include any of these kinds of use that the police find for the information
so that's the mission creek that I'm talking about and you know and when you talk about community
support what which is one of the listed purposes in section nine it could be counterproductive
because if you're surveilling a target population to try and intimidate them for example rangatahi
or something like that you might think well you know we can intimidate people by taking
photographs of them deterring them from committing crime that could actually be counterproductive
because you know community support really means taking the community with you not
necessarily making them the objects of surveillance so that was an issue the other issue I wanted to
raise is to dispel the notion that somehow all we're doing is restoring the status quo
the current the I've listed these points in my submission there are sections of the
policing act at the moment section of 32 33 and 34 of the principal act which allow the police
to retain images and other biographical data and there are various conditions on that that they need
to that that information is for a proceed current proceedings or when someone is detained
but there's an obligation where the proceeding doesn't carry carry on for the images to be
to be deleted so that that's that's that is the status quo and this bill changes that status
quo by now allowing those images to be retained potentially indefinitely as I think one of your
previous speakers also mentioned there was the issue identified by the independent police
complaints authority and the OPC joint investigation about access and correction to those
records and the police previously have struggled to actually I know they have made some improvements
and I have a great deal of respect for the police you know they have been trying hard
to to improve their data collection and storage practices but we know that there's a
there's a possibility that you know these images could be dispersed and it might be difficult to
retrieve them and once things go in the national intelligence database I've given an example
of cases where you know decades later it comes back to haunt a respectable member of the
community when you know there's a police vetting request and somehow their image or their
information pops up so the clarity is needed as to the whether the privacy act and the biometric
processing code continues to apply I think they should we have no right of deletion in New Zealand
and that is a great concern to me as a privacy academic I think we need our law needs to have
retention limits and that's something that's currently not in the law I also want to address
section 45c clause that are rather close 45c of the bill which allows police to take images on
private property it needs to they need to comply with a reasonableness test but that's not very
clear as to how that compares with the more nuanced balancing that's required for example in the
biometric privacy processing code which does require a risk assessment to be balanced to get
privacy risks to be balanced with the benefits in a more nuanced kind of manner a more finely
grained kind of way of doing that the reasonableness test is just too blunt and in conclusion I also
think if this bill goes ahead there needs to be some provision for not only a very very clear
statements of the privacy acts acts needs to completely continue to apply but also the
need for subsequent powers of audit for the privacy commissioner or the or the independent police
complaints authority to be able to audit how these new collection powers are being used and that
they're not being used in an overbroad way that that's pretty much all I had to say I'm happy to
take questions at this time okay we've got one oh I think we have one from Rima Nakley
thanks Mr Chair um thank you sir uh I want to ask one of your earlier references
was about the huge difference between police using pictures taking pictures and members of the public
well members of the public taking pictures and um with respect to this uh huge difference um
are you am I to understand that uh you would also like to see maybe in the future some changes
with respect to laws and how people can take members of the public can take pictures
seeing that you um have studied this and you're an expert in this field would you
make yeah sorry yeah that's an excellent question it's an excellent question and
it's probably beyond the the brief of the current inquiry I guess but um if I could
just answer that briefly I think that the office of the privacy commissioner does have very
detailed guidance to two members of the public as to as to their taking of pictures so I think in
the first instance members of the public who want to take pictures in public generally our law is
pretty relaxed in that respect in New Zealand um it's it's really and there are broad exceptions
for example for individuals in the privacy act where they're doing it for their personal or family
needs um but if they're doing it in a business context or even a hobby perhaps then apart from
the polite convention that you always get the permission of the person you're taking a photo
of um there are requirements in the privacy act because pictures are personal information
as covered by the act um so that's my brief reply I think you know there's already plenty of guidance
around that I'm not sure that we need separate legislation on it I think that the law currently
does allow picture taking and also um addressing some of the points made by earlier earlier
speakers today um if a retail members of the retail community who are worried by you know
a threat posed by a particular person they are entitled to take photos if there's and then to
transfer transmit them to the police the the public the privacy act does have pretty broad
exceptions where they have a reasonable basis for believing it's necessary to for follow up to
give that information to law enforcement authority but the test is there has to be a reasonable
basis you can't just take pictures of everyone and treat everyone as a suspect you know unless
you have some reasonable basis for it so professor running in time but I've got two questions um
go ahead in your section nine you listed the six thresholds or areas where you can do
surveillance one is community support and uh reassurance when you on what you understand
that to mean and the second one is your ability to check your file and if there are
something on there that's clearly incorrect or whatever you can ask for it to deletion
what is the international practice around that so hopefully sorry I'm running out of time but
keena paid your views on those well the second question is probably more tricky but the the
the first community support is pretty broadly defined as it as is proper I guess and and
that's what the policing but the police does an excellent job of most all of the time
pretty much and and that's you know policing by consent which is uh which is the ideal situation
where the community is happy with what the police are doing and do everything in their power to
support the police but on the other hand you can backfire if you as I've said you know this is
the whole minority report situation if you think someone is more likely to commit a crime and you
watch them more the more of the time it can actually be a self-fulfilling prophecy because
you know apart from the fact the data you're gathering is going to make the result rigged
in the sense that you know those people are whether they commit more offenses or not they're
more likely to be caught they do so there is a fairness aspect and we know that there has
been that in the independent police complaints authority investigation earlier about rangatahi
and and the perception that some groups Maori and others were were victimized in terms of your
second point I think was what are the access and what are the correction rights in New Zealand
they're relatively weak because the Privacy Act does and and the biometric code which basically
mirrors the Privacy Act says that people individuals have the right to ask for correction
but they don't have a right to require correction or require deletion or deletion is not one of
the rights that specifically are required under New Zealand law at the moment now there are
extreme circumstances where sometimes the only appropriate correction is to delete it
and there have been occasional cases in the Human Rights Review Tribunal where that has been
ordered but they're rare and and generally as in the case that I give in my written submission
I think it's EFG I can't remember the name of the case it's in the submission
you'll see that in that case the police the police had in that case made a mistake they had
released information that was well out of date it was no longer relevant it was therefore
misleading it blighted a very successful career of a person who was a councillor
and but at the same time when his lawyers asked for the information police to delete the information
from the National Intelligence the Human Rights Committee Human Rights Tribunal was not prepared
to do that they said no we can't second guess the police reason for we're retaining that information
but we think they should be very careful before releasing it so these are these are with
the tensions I think will come if you retain the all of this information down the track it
could cause issues to individuals and how are you going to make sure that it's it's you know very
carefully managed and those those are the kinds of concerns I have all right hey thank you Professor
we're slightly over time but um I very much appreciate your detailed submission on this area thank you
chair thank you for that right now I'm going to pivot here chambers junior Spillman junior
you with us there you are thank you now we've got 10 months with you looking forward to hearing
what you've got to say 10 hour code to a car tow my name's actually Elizabeth Hall from Pippa
Tea chambers oh sorry no that's all right um junior Spillman from Te Hangeroya will be
replaced by someone else that's no problem at all um I'm Elizabeth Hall I'm the founder and
co-chair of to Matakahi the Defense Lawyers Association and I bring uh to this select committee
discussion 30 years of personal experience and the wealth of experience of my um committee and
also organization where we have spent our lifetimes working on watching decision making that police
make watching the surveillance and the monitoring that they engage in and the searches that they
conduct and so I come to speak in opposition to this bill not just as a criminal defense lawyer
but also as a general lawyer and a citizen of New Zealand because for the last 10 years I have been
hoping that one day I would be sitting in the seat talking to a select committee
about the need for police to wear body cameras to record their conduct for transparency
accountability and to support the rule of law and the effective operation of a safe
and fair criminal justice system and yet I find myself today sitting here arguing about
how far the state should be allowed to go in collecting information about ordinary
New Zealanders who have done nothing who are not suspected of committing a crime
but where the police would be able to collect images sound and other personal information
in the hope that they may at some point serve a policing function in the future
without any definition this bill represents a significant expansion of police power
particularly around intelligence gathering and public area enforcement these changes are
being advanced without consultation effectively without safeguards and importantly without
justification it matters because legislation of this kind doesn't just affect people that you
might think have committed a crime it affects every New Zealander who walks through every public
space attends a protest gathers with friends or interacts on a daily every day basis the
bill ostensibly was introduced in response to the Supreme Court decision and Tommy Founa and the
Queen the King sorry in that case the court found that the police had acted unlawfully
when photographing a member of the public during a routine traffic stop and retained the image without
lawful investigation basis our Supreme Court was clear even in public spaces New Zealanders retain
reasonable expectations of privacy the state cannot collect and permanently retain personal
information arbitrarily just because the technology exists and rather than responding
to a judgment which I know our Minister of Justice has made clear that if there's any legislative
discussion by our Supreme Court that he doesn't like he'll simply change the law
this bill goes much further it seeks to not only legalize conduct that our Supreme Court
has said would be wrong but it substantially expands police authority to retain and collect
personal information and it's an extraordinarily broad power it shifts us away from targeted
policing based on suspicion or investigation towards speculative information gathering
collecting information today about citizens in case it might be useful tomorrow and that
should concern us all because once information enters a state intelligence system experience
tells us that it is impossible to control what happens to it how long it's kept how widely
it's shared and what purpose it's put to what this bill does is remove an existing requirement
under our privacy law that information gathering needs to be necessary for a lawful purpose
the change is subtle and word-in but enormous in consequence that means the threshold for collecting
information is now so low as to be non-existent this is not a bill to assist targeted policing
this is a bill to introduce routine surveillance of New Zealanders the privacy commissioner has
warned that these powers could have a chilling effect on civil rights and freedoms that warning
deserves serious attention when people believe they may be photographed monitored and permanently
recorded by the state without suspicion of wrongdoing behavior changes that's not hypothetical
people become less willing to engage in protest and democracy less willing to
associate freely and history tells us that when broad surveillance powers are expanded they
continue to expand and practice over time one of the key concerns that you have heard time and time
again before the select committee in this government's term is the rushing of legislation
that dramatically changes the fabric of our society without time for consultation or
due regard for consultation from experts working in this field key agencies on this bill have also
expressed grave concern about the limited evidence of the reason or justification for this intervention
in New Zealanders lives constrained policy analysis flawed application of the New Zealand
Bill of Rights and total um abject insufficient consultation with Māori and affected communities
this is not about questioning the intentions of the police but it would be wrong for us to not sit
in this room and acknowledge that we are still experiencing a fallout of senior police officers
demonstrating a gross misjudgment of decision-making it is not that long ago 2018 when the independent
police commissioner released a report about police using the land transport act powers to stop and
retain information about people citizens attending a private meeting what that demonstrates to us
is that where legislation is without detail where legislation doesn't build in safeguards and
necessary constraint left to their own devices the New Zealand police on occasion make errors of
judgment that affect New Zealand citizens so good law is not built on trust and good intentions
it's built on clear limits accountability transparency and democratic legitimacy this bill
fails on every demand that we would have of it transparency is essential when the state is
granted extraordinary power this debate is not about whether the police should be able to investigate
crime of course they should the public expects and demands the police keep community safe and
have effective tools to do so but effective policing and civil liberties are not opposing
values they depend on each other public trust is one of the most important tools policing has
this trust is strengthened when powers are necessary proportionate transparent and subject
to meaningful oversight to matakaki the defense laws association and the lawyers appearing
before you are not saying do nothing we are saying slow down consult properly define powers
clearly and ensure that laws that are made reflect modern democratic expectations of privacy
and accountability we are not being obstructive we are being responsible we do not want laws
that dramatically change the fabric of our society because of a knee jerk rebellion
to a supreme court judgment once powers of surveillance and control are normalized they
will not be rolled back so the decisions that the select committee make and the parliament make
will define the relationship between the state and the citizens of new zealand for years to come
and what we say is that that relationship should be grounded in rights trust and democratic principle
Thank you Elizabeth for that I've got one question from Camilla that village
thank you thank you thank you very much for your powerful submission and for putting the submission
together with your colleagues I just had a question around the the steps that we could take and
thank you for your summation which said that we should be more considerate and go slower we've
heard from the law association and the tamifuna judgment that there needed to be a change to the
law and we will hear from the privacy commissioner later today around the extent that they consider
that changes will be necessary what what do you think would be an appropriate response to that
judgment given your given kind of your opposition to what's proposed in the bill well I think
that the risk of removing the necessity principle is very dangerous the bill currently widens the
scope of collection to remove any necessary linkage of the lawful purpose and the collection of the
data and that would be the first starting point for at least some accountability on the police
to have to have a need for the collecting of information what I'm concerned about is and
again it might just be a lawyer thing but we often say the devil is in the detail and this bill
is devoid of detail it's essentially kicking for touch down the road how this bill would if
made law effectively be rolled out and my concern and the concern of many lawyers that have had the
advantage in the time to review this bill is that when those decisions are being made
they will not be made with the principles of privacy and the interests of the overall
society and justice of New Zealand being brought in so I think that in short it's a tricky one because
obviously my position is that this should just be scrapped back to the drawing board
and a proper period of consultation there is no urgency with this legislation that it's not
responding to an immediate need to change the current status quo and what the Supreme Court
has said and to engage these powers we've essentially urgency and lacking consultation
and lacking proper drafting and consultation around the drafting that's going to lead to
error and it's going to be difficult to unwind that error going forward and so I do say pause
go back to the drafting making sure that there's at least a link between the necessity
and working out more steps for accountability record keeping and decision making because
currently the bill is devoid. All right hey thank you Elizabeth we're way over time
Ringo we might just put you on hold until the next one but thank you for your time. Thank you.
Thank you Elizabeth. Now we're I think we're going to Julia but I see Dr Alex Graves is there
in our next submission so right cool thank you very much are you on your own?
Oh yes I am yeah cool okay we've got 10 minutes with you looking forward to hearing which one to say.
Tenatato yes thank you for the opportunity to present to the select committee on this bill
yeah unfortunately Julia wasn't able to make it so my name's Alex Graves I'm standing in for
today presenting Hongaroya. Hongaroya's submission on the bill
obviously you've heard from some other speakers already this morning in our submissions
take a similar line particularly to what Elizabeth has just spoken to you about just previous to this
a particular area that there is concern is that this has been flagged as responding to
the Supreme Court decision as you've already heard our view is that it is an expansion to the status
quo rather than responding simply to the decision and it does represent a concerning trend of
receiving a decision which isn't liked or isn't agreed with and legislating over the top of that
which does present some concerns around the court and its function and its ability to carry out
its function being a fundamental part of the way that our legal system works. The other
major concern we have with this in and amongst the limited ability for consultation and limited
engagement on it is recognizing teatiriti or waitangi and the the simple fact that
Māori are severely over represented in much of the system whether that's in the investigative
stage whether that's in the criminal proceeding stage and going forward so we do have some very real
concerns over broadening the police powers in such an extent as what this bill does
and the effect and disproportionate effect that that would have on Māori and being
sometimes or many times a more vulnerable part of our our community.
It also presents issues particularly in the private space where it opens up the ability to
to do surveillance and particularly in private spaces if we look at other
areas where police have the ability to delve into those spaces which might otherwise be private.
There are often checks and balances in place for a search warrant they were required to apply
and justify reasons why they should be able to do just that. In this we in this bill we don't
see any of that it's simply the the officer must satisfy themselves so it's a circular
circular argument really they have to satisfy themselves that they've got the ability to do it
rather than satisfying an objective person an objective assessment of of what they
they need to do without having a particular need it could be just in case
so there's a there's a concern there without wanting to
repeat too much of of what you would have already heard and what's already in the submissions
and I recognize as you've indicated Mr Chair that you are over time so I'm happy to
to leave it there and open up for questions if there are any.
Right he thinks Alex I really appreciate that right any questions from anyone?
All right Alex as you know we've heard a lot of submissions so don't take as
reflection on your submission it's a very good submission but
being helpful to have that point read rest again today so thank you for joining us this morning.
Thank you. Right we are now going to the New Zealand Outdoors and Freedom Party
hopefully and we've got Allison as in and I also thought right cool thank you very much
Allison we've got 10 minutes with you. Thank you. I'm Allison Pavlovich from the Outdoors and Freedom
Freedom Party and of course one of the objectives of the party is to advocate for the protection of
fundamental rights and freedoms for all New Zealanders and so this bill has raised some interest
and subsequently concern from members of the party so there's obviously two powers that are
being introduced by this bill right at the beginning of the bill the general policy statement says
the bill reaffirms the New Zealand police's long-standing ability to record images and
sounds in public places and to collect personal information for lawful purposes including intelligence.
I think as you've probably heard already from many submitters it's not really a reaffirmation
because the law is quite clearly stated in Tim Tamifuna and a lot of those principles are
supported by the IPCA and Privacy Commissioner report around taking photos in particular and then it
continues the general policy statement at the beginning continues it's okay I'm not going to
read the whole thing it's just important this little bit. We've all read your question
we're probably going on our screens right now reading everything. Yeah exactly right at the
beginning the ability to collect and use information is essential to the police's delivery
of a broad range of policing functions and services that support the vision
for New Zealand to be the safest country where people can go about their daily life without fear
of harm or victimization and it's really those last reasons that I think are the main reasons
why the party do not support the bill because of the fear of harm or victimization.
Okay so just starting with the first power the new power to allow police to record and take photos
and other forms of taking images so this explicitly runs counter to the finding in the
Tamifuna decision so I'm sure you're already aware the majority of the Supreme Court found
that taking photos without the context of a specific investigation was an unreasonable search
and breached the the right that's granted to New Zealanders under section 21 of the Bill of Rights
Act. And I also want to note and this was mentioned by this a Gihan Gunasakara I think his name is
he talked about the fact that this is different that taking photos is different it's the next level
to just taking a phone number and and and the name because this is biometric data and in the
Tamifuna case Justice Alan France specifically said that one of the reasons for the decision that
the majority of the court made was that this protection is a development as part of the
response necessary to address the impact on section 21 interests of increasingly sophisticated
technology so she's recognized that taking photos with increasingly sophisticated technology
becomes more and more of a infringement on on New Zealanders rights.
Of course the IPCA Privacy Commissioner report also acknowledged that photographing members of the
public was not not acceptable without unless specific crimes were being investigated and
urged caution around those practices and this bill is very broadly stated and really overrides
that case the Tamifuna case and the concerns of the IPCA and the Privacy Commissioner
and certainly as a party we are also concerned about the impact on the rights and freedoms of
New Zealanders to go about their daily life free of threat or fear of being photographed or filmed
by the policing wing of the New Zealand government and having one's details held on file on a
system without any reasonable justification and this really is is completely runs contrary to the
to the that initial paragraph and the general policy statement it is because of the
people wanting to go about their daily life without fear of harm or victimization that this first
power shouldn't be introduced at all. I won't go over it again but Tim Cochran talked about the
Section 7 report and I have discussed a little bit in the submission that we made. There are some
weaknesses in that report especially with respect to that first right no proportionality has been
testing has been undertaken so I would urge the select committee to go back and look at that
again and because Section 5 of the Bill of Rights Act does require that we're a specific piece of
legislation is overriding a right in the Bill of Rights Act there needs to be a justification
for that overriding and that needs to be done through a proportionality analysis that's well
established in New Zealand law now. Okay I'd also like to acknowledge Elizabeth's
submission to reiterate and say that I agree with the things that she said she talked about
speculative information gathering and that's what this new right does it definitely extends the
power significantly into what I would consider quite a dangerous territory. As long as I've got
time or just your briefly... I see you've got one more thing about the traffic yeah. Just with the
respect to the second power the power to close off areas it's clearly written that in the context
in terms of the introduction around with the lens or its frame toward boy races
or some sort of road traffic fences but it could clearly be utilised a lot more broadly than that
and certainly our concern is the right to protest so important I wouldn't be sitting here having
this conversation if it wasn't for protesters in the past you know protesting for all sorts of
rights that are now we regard as normal every single day. I think that if this is just a road
policing issue then that needs to be the legislation needs to be drafted more narrowly to ensure
that's understood at the moment it could be used far more broadly than that so it is also
a concern to the party. I'll leave it at that. All right thank you Alison for going through your
two pages in very detailed. We are out of time unfortunately but thank you for it and I'm
sure that you'll feel better for making those statements but number of those items you've
heard it before as you've heard. Yes. All right thank you very much. Right now we've got Hannah I think
on the zoom bringing to join us hey good morning well afternoon now it's early afternoon. Good afternoon.
You're from Free Speech Union is that correct? That's correct yes. Oh we've got Tamaritz with you.
Fantastic thank you thanks very much. My name is Hannah Clau I am in house council for the
Free Speech Union. The Free Speech Union opposes this bill our submission as you'll see is fairly
detailed on this and I will attempt to summarize our key points briefly for you today. First part
one's explanatory note in our view is misleading as it characterizes the current situation
it mischaracterizes it says that the police have a long-standing ability to record images
and sounds in public places and this new legislation is simply reaffirming that and clarifying that.
But the independent police conduct authority disagrees and it's joint inquiry with the privacy
commissioner in 2022 it said there are restrictions on this the supreme court came to a similar
conclusion last year so what authority is this bill relying on here what long-standing ability
are we talking about officers have only had smartphones with cameras and recording
features since 2013 as the IPCA pointed out the use of technology has changed drastically
over the last 10 or so years. Now the joint inquiry and the supreme court clarified restrictions
on the police's ability to take photos and record people to protect civil rights such as the
requirement for a link to an actual law enforcement purpose or in relation to the investigation
of a crime. This bill bulldozes over this and allows the police to record collect and retain
any information about a person place or sound in a public place for an undefined intelligence
purpose. This will have a chilling effect on freedom of expression people will assume
they're being watched at protests rallies and other public events so they won't attend and
fear that they'll be identified recorded and profiled later on. With respect to part two
we see massive implications for protesting in New Zealand the bill proposes to expand police powers
to temporarily close a road for them to be able to close any accessible area if they believe there
is or may be public disorder that can be applied to almost any protest in a public place
not only that but police would have the power to shut down any public space that may provide access
to a private space so private events on private property that would only empower what we call
thugs veto so protest an event and you can actually force the police to shut down the area around
an event preventing people from entering. What's particularly egregious about part two
is its direct contradiction to the IPCA's thematic review on policing public protests
in New Zealand released last year. What is the point of these entities such as the IPCA
if they're just going to be ignored? Their findings should at least be engaged with
and if they are rejected a clear justification as to why. The attorney general's report I will
also note is meant to flag inconsistencies with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act but it's wholly
inadequate here. The only reference to freedom of expression is in relation to potential
compelled speech when providing biographical details. There is no mention of the effect
of the substantial expansion of police powers on freedom of expression and protest.
So what we have here just to round this up is a bill that mischaracterizes the current
legal situation, rejects the protections for civil liberties that independent bodies such as
the Supreme Court and the IPCA have clarified and confirmed without clear reason as to why
and has not been properly scrutinized by the protections for civil liberties under the New
Zealand Bill of Rights Act. So it should not proceed. If the committee has any questions
I'm happy to. Right thanks Hannah. Very good. Right members the questions for Hannah.
No questions but a good submission. It's not usual for me to tell say that to the
free speech union but thanks for speaking out on that. Thank you. Yeah cool. Appreciate that.
Thank you very much. Yeah I think everyone you know it's a very lengthy submission we've
all seen it so thank you Hannah for coming on and talking us through that. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Right now we've got
Su Wing Ong Mr. Is it Mr. Ong? Yeah I saw you arrive earlier.
And now I've got five minutes with you Mr. Ong. So looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Okay New Zealand price is I'm sure price itself as a liberal democracy and the thing that separates
a liberal democracy from the more authoritarian theory regime of which there's a spectrum is that
there's safeguards against governmental power and the problem with this bill as I read it and
I read it as a lay person I've got no degree in law whatsoever I don't I don't practice in law I have no
I'm a data analyst actually is that the safeguards there's practically no safeguards
the bill seems to allow the police individual police shall I say and I'll come back to that
individual police person to decide whether they want to take a photo or whatever other
biometric information and the wording that's used to solve justify that is so wide that you could
solve there I say drive a truck through it and that's where I have my problem it's it's not the
actual act of it it's just the widespread nature and there's no accountability and what I fear what
I fear most is that the individual policeman could solve say oh it was my gut feeling I thought that
person was loitering or I thought this person didn't look right or they drove off they drove an
expensive car and they didn't look like they should have the money to draw an expensive car and
you know that happens a lot in the United States where people of color origin driving
driving expensive cars tend to get stopped and the worry is that this thing will entrench
unconscious bias amongst police personnel now you know it's an unconscious bias so it's not
necessarily that you think oh you know I dislike olmari or anything like that but it just grows
and it's part of an institution as well and you know an institution has its own biases and that's
where my problem with this bill is um and the problem is that it's so loose the the wording is so
loose that as I say you could drive a truck through now you wouldn't you wouldn't do any other facet of
government and sort of say well if you felt like it you could do it like you we don't say you
felt like wearing a seatbelt you know it's up to you you can choose to wear a seatbelt and
no it's up to you no we sort of say everyone has to wear a seatbelt and similarly you don't have a
choice as to whether you pay tax or not everyone has to pay tax and there's no discrimination there
you know whether you're whether you're rich poor chinese or you know whatever race or whatever
sexual orientation you have to pay tax and that's the safeguard there is that you can
codify in law and that's fine but when you leave it open and so I'll just say whatever justification
you can come up with that's where your unconscious bias comes into it and that's really my sole point
and happy to take any questions you have well I'm glad you said you rented lawyer which is good to
hear from non lawyers occasionally now have we got any questions members
okay so we I hear your strong point which is
is you really got issues with part one of the bill and being clear about what the purpose of that is so
thank you for that very useful hearing from a citizen just on that perspective perspective
so thank you for joining us this one thank you very much right good right now we have got the
office of the privacy commissioner and there's a number of you there Mr. Webster looking forward
hearing from you we've got a reasonable amount of time that's been set aside
if you gather your team so I'll leave it to you to introduce your team
we've got until 1245 or to see how we go thank you Mr. Chair can I introduce my colleagues
on my left Joe Hayward who's our general counsel on my right you and Lincoln who's our principal
advisor policy I also have my manager of policy in Kennedy with me today as well
a number of us lawyers some of us aren't very good
Mr. Chair members as you will have seen from my written submission I do not support part one of
the bill and I recommend that it not be passed it's not often that I call for a legislative
proposal to be completely rejected and I do so now because I have deep concerns about the
implications with part one some context that may be of interest to the committee my office
has just completed its 2026 privacy survey and the results suggest that our fellow Kiwis
are increasingly concerned about their right to privacy and what happens with their personal
information such as an image captured by photo or video at some results Mr. Chair over half
say they have become more concerned about privacy in recent years 82 percent an extraordinarily
high figure want more say in how their information is collected and used and confidence that New
Zealand law adequately protects personal information is low only 18 percent are extremely or very
confident while a third have little or no confidence at all that New Zealand law adequately protects
their personal information so in today's more fractious times trust and confidence
in important state institutions like the police is a precious thing and I'm concerned that
the proposals in part one of the bill risk undermining that trust and confidence
it appears that under this provision information may be collected simply because it may in some
unspecified way support the police and carrying out its functions and activities
as an indication of the potential breadth of this authorization the regulatory impact statement for
the bill refers to collection or general intelligence purposes in terms of collection
for an unknown or unspecified future policing purpose and a known or unknown future lawful use
by providing such a broad authorization for police collection of information part one of
the bill creates significant privacy risks that could lead to police collecting and
retaining information about New Zealanders that police have no good reason to hold
I believe the bill needs to include an objective reasonable threshold for police collection of
information Mr. Chair members no compelling case has been made for police to receive such
wide powers to collect people's information my office has asked for examples of specific
scenarios in which police considers that the current legal settings prevent its
officers from effectively performing their functions and we have not been provided with
any such examples I understand that police want legal certainty but I don't believe
the bill as drafted provides that certainty because the boundaries of the police's powers
are unclear in this bill they are likely to be tested in court the courts will still be
able to determine whether police actions constitute an unreasonable search in the circumstances
the broad authorization in this bill also means that important protections in the
privacy act may not apply that will not apply I do not accept that police should have such
a broad discretion to collect use and retain personal information without reasonable limits
being in place at the same time the bill lacks safeguards and provides no certainty to New Zealanders
that their privacy rights will be protected I am concerned about how this bill impacts
on people's civil and political rights for example it's possible that the bill could allow
police to take video of a group of young people say hanging out in a park not because
they are connected to a possible crime a possible investigation or a public safety reason
but something to keep tabs on the group of people because the video might be useful one day
I'm not saying that police would necessarily take video in those situations but I believe the
bill the bill would allow them to do so so long as the officers can loosely connect the photos
to a policing function or activity and once the photos have been taken they can be kept of course
on police's systems potentially indefinitely even though the people in the photos may have no connection
to criminal activity on that I'm also concerned that police has still not addressed the serious
inadequacies in its management and oversight of information through necessary improvements
to its own information management systems a problem that they themselves have identified
as a result therefore I have concerns around the storage the retention and destruction and
indeed the secondary use of personal information conducted and collected under the powers in this
bill in place of part one of this bill I would like to see a more careful and a more considered
process to develop a legislative framework for police intelligence gathering I believe that such
a framework could strike an appropriate balance between protecting privacy and allowing police
to collect the information it needs however if the bill proceeds it is essential I believe
that it be amended to provide protections for people's privacy and their rights I'd like
to see the effect of the privacy principles in the Privacy Act maintained other safeguards
included in the bill either through primary or secondary legislation safeguards being subject
to independent oversight and the commencement date for the bill pushed back to allow safeguards
to be put in place key safeguards should include controls on retention and secondary use of
personal information our requirements for record keeping accountability and transparency about
the exercise of police powers and as I noted in my submission if I can assist the committee in
developing appropriate safeguards I would be happy to provide further advice or to appear before the
committee again in conclusion Mr. Chair and members the police of course do have an important
and challenging job to do but given their significant coercive powers they need to do
and be seen to do that job in a way that protects and respects law-abiding New Zealanders
rights to privacy no matter where they are sweeping police powers may inevitably catch
some criminals but are inconsistent with life in a free and democratic society thank you Mr. Chair
thank you members right thank you very much we'll go to Ginny Anderson first thank you thank you very
much um thank you for your submission it was very thorough uh my question I have two questions
the first is that the minister of police has stated that this legislation simply
reinstates the law as it was before the Tommy Frider case uh is that your view and if not why
um I believe that uh in the case of Tommy Fooner that was a specific response by the
supreme court to a specific situation I don't think that the police has lost anything from for
example the work that we did through our IPCA OPC inquiry into the photograph of a youth in the
Wairarapa or indeed the Tommy Fooner decision Joe would you like to talk a bit more about Tommy
Fooner um yes thank you Michael yes I think the um the commissioners submission um
departs from the police's view of that um this bill is simply restoring the law um our perspective
is that the joint report and Tommy Fooner we're highlighting the legal constraints
applying to police when they are conducting this activity so rather than narrowing the law um police
carry out their powers within a broader statutory framework that framework includes
the policing act principles the search and surveillance act uh New Zealand Bill of Rights
Act the land transport act and the privacy act so the report by um the OPC and the IPCA
and the supreme court's decision were applying the statutory framework to the particular
factual situations and in Mr Tommy Fooner's case that involved a traffic stop under the land transport
act thank you thank you very much my second question is in relation to your comments around
the restorage the storage and retention of digital images um we've asked a number of
questions about this going forward and uh I was still not reassured that there was sufficient
police um IT infrastructure or the requisite funding to enable the internal systems to be able to
record evidence and fold it in such a way that it would be able to be checked the only answer that
we did get was that the new electronic notebook that police used would be of assistance to be
able to do this but I still didn't have the reassurance that there was the sufficient
investment in into IT infrastructure to enable some of the checks and balances
that you have outlined in your submission is there anything that you would like to add to that in
terms of your awareness of the capability of police to be able to monitor and retain and destroy images
yes thank you for that the police certainly have a number of tools to take digital images
the issue for us and that's been brought into sharp relief through the response to our formal
compliance notice under the privacy act in relation to the taking of photographs in the wire apper
is the ability to store those in a way that they can be readily retrieved or indeed deleted
when they're not needed anymore we have through that compliance notice been seeking to have
all unlawfully taken photographs deleted from police systems and that is one area where police
have told us and in fact have said publicly that they have been unable to identify those photos due to
inadequacies in their current information management systems so yes there are some
significant challenges there what we will inevitably see under the proposal set out in the bill
is the taking of photographs of people who have been going about their lawful every day
business those photos are going to end up in a police system next to people who have been
convicted or accused of some of our most worst crimes it's all together in one database
and the ability for that material to be retrieved I think is an open question given the current
inadequacies in the way the systems are working at present and just one last question please
Mr. Chair um do you think that introducing this legislation is premature given that the required
IT infrastructure to do what it is required through privacy is currently not in place
so two things I want to say if this bill proceeds as it is as it is and I would
certainly hope that if it was the view of the government to proceed with this legislation
that they would consider the the natures of the amendments we've proposed there would need to be
a much greater period set aside before it comes into force in terms of commencement
to enable police to put in place in necessary systems procedures and infrastructure to enable
it to function effectively second though my first best option is that this part of the bill
will be not commenced with and that we start a as I said a considered and careful process
with a great degree of public consultation as well of course on the sort of intelligence
collection regime there will be appropriate for a police force going forward in the modern era
with all the digital innovation available to us okay thank you thank you very much I've got
Todd Stephenson we've got a number of questions coming up with him thank you thank you commissioner
and your team for your detailed submission great work a couple of things I want to explore one
is I would certainly can't speak for the whole committee but I'd certainly be interested in your
additional safeguards that you would like to see put in place I think one of the issues
and everything you've raised super is important super important I think we
yeah there might be some things we can do to this bill one to address some of the
issues you have done and then I really am interested in this this idea around
a framework for police intelligence gathering do you think there's a way we could
put strengths in the bill by putting in some safeguards but then also
you know noting and say regulations that there has to be this this framework that you're talking
about it do you know could you see some somewhere we could yeah some way we could achieve what you
want but not not well delay maybe implementation but at least have it available be done in the future
sure through you mr chair I guess if I think about safeguards I I think about four areas
first tighter thresholds for police collection of information needing to assess whether it's
necessary to collect the information whether the privacy benefits of the collection and
propose use are proportionate to the expected benefits for policing functions so tighter thresholds
reflecting the privacy principles there second controls on the storage retention and destruction
and secondary use of that information collected under the powers in the bill
third accountability and transparency provisions such as requirements for record keeping
auditing public recording and publication of policies relating to the exercise
of the police's powers and fourth of course oversight of police police compliance with safeguards
by an independent body one of our concerns of course with the the provisions is drafted in part one
is that they displace the the privacy act and therefore the ability of my office to exercise
some prudential oversight of what the police is doing in the space in terms of primary regular
primary legislation or regulation I guess first piece would be useful to have even if it's at a
higher level such safeguards specified in legislation and then with the ability for for example for
the responsible minister to make regulations to provide some more detail we would expect that
regulations making power to not be discretionary that it would be in a a a requirement of the
minister to make those regulations through the the correct process with public consultation
of course if I think about other agencies that are active in this space in the surveillance space
we have of course two security and intelligence agencies which carry out their intrusive functions
within a very sophisticated and comprehensive network of statutory provisions and oversight
of what they do and one of my concerns of course is that in the area of surveillance we
have to as a nation be careful to avoid what I would call surveillance creep by other state agencies
we have two agencies who for special in particular reasons have extraordinary surveillance powers
and they are and those are undertaken within a as I say a comprehensive statutory framework to
protect the rights and freedoms of New Zealand citizens I would be very wary of similar powers
being given to other state agencies without such a similar set of safeguards being in place
all right maybe a further tip Todd's question I think it'd be useful if you could supply
some further thoughts on it just on the oversight you also suggested in your report the appointment
or oversight by the new inspector general police and that's one recommendation earlier we heard
about the general data protection regulation that many international countries adopt can you give me
provide a view on whether we need both one and are you clear that the inspector general is the
right pick organization to do any oversight and we were to impose something sure my colleagues
might wish to say more on that but what I would say is that we have seen developments in other
countries on the other side of the world and closer to home in Australia where the the oversight
bodies that look after for example the intelligence agencies as I've just been talking about have
actually had their their authority extended to cover the police carrying out such surveillance
activities but we of course have had the proposal to have an inspector general of police I think
at the end of the day would come to how that the responsibilities roles and powers of that
agency are drawn up I will see it as a place where there could be a number of oversight bodies I would
hope that the office of the privacy commissioner that would remain one of those with oversight
responsibilities as well as an inspector general of police anything further you want to say on that
I think just to add to that I think the important priorities to make sure this bill
anticipates oversight so that it includes the safeguards that mean that any oversight body can
engage with police activities unfortunately the inspector general of police is not yet
come to fruition but if the bill is established in such a way that anticipates oversight then
you can deal with the choice of oversight body perhaps further down the track once that
inspector general comes on on on stream so you're not specifically proposing inspector general but
you're saying that that is one cost possibility or are you saying when it comes to surveillance and
we've got intelligence we've got other activities we should be adopting what we have for these
GCIS or SIS type arrangement you got a clear view on that I guess what just to clarify for the
committee mr. chair what I'm saying is if we went through for example a different process in the one
before the committee today where there was a a considered and careful process to develop
the spoke standalone legislative framework for police surveillance activities I would absolutely
see a role for a future inspector general of police in relation to that what we would need to
be sure about though is that we didn't have a situation where the police had commenced for
example carrying out a new regime of surveillance activity without that oversight being in place
right okay get the point um you talked about the objective um for holding data and
been very clear about when you're saying the bill doesn't section 45 talks about any other lawful
purpose and so you have you got clear proposals around how you've tightened that aspect
you and we don't have specific wording but we do think that there needs to be a clear
uh threshold uh and justification um a necessity test and some sort of uh test of
proportionality of the collection of information by police so at the moment the power that's in
section 45 a the other sections that would be introduced by the bill are very broad ranging
and in particular we're concerned that the requirement under the privacy act that you
need to uh determine whether the collection of information is necessary would effectively be
removed by this act so uh but by this bill sorry so we would like um that kind of threshold to
be reintroduced in some way do you think that was intentional to remove that or do you think
that's just an intentional consequence in terms of reference to the privacy commission
of well the um the materials relating to this bill do indicate a policy intent for the privacy
act to still apply our analysis is that it will be displaced in some respects so it is perhaps
possible that uh it's been a misunderstanding or an unintentional consequence but we do think
that it would be the legal effect of this bill that in particular that first principle in the
privacy act which is central to the whole act would be effectively displaced okay so it would be useful
get your thoughts on that um around maintaining that aspect the other bit the one bit that no one
sort of picked up on but you do raise in your report is about police employees with something that
we've asked um the officials about but they understand around that is where you have a crime scene and you've
got people you might want to bring on specialists what's your view on that or did you simply not
understand what that term meant yeah we were simply um asking the question i guess um as to
whether there was a rationale behind that because some parts of the policing act uh the powers in
those parts are restricted to constables others are more general to police employees so we were
just wanting to test whether there was a good rationale given that constables have to go through
additional um training and requirements in order to meet the test to become a constable
so it's good to hear that the committee has asked officials for advice on that point
do you um you made the coming about intelligence and intelligence purpose need to be better defined
do you have a clear view around the difference between intelligence intelligence purpose and
surveillance as which relates to the act or sorry of the bill yes yes mr. chair that is
why we raise the question a lot could be packed into that word the police do have
existing guidance documents that refer to their intelligence function and so as part of our
discussions prior to the bill being introduced we raised the question about the usefulness
of having a definition of intelligence in the bill the clearer the bill is the clearer
New Zealanders be aware of their their rights and privileges in relation to it and a lack of a
definition in that space does create more uncertainty we believe and and for not just members of the
public but also for police officers and carrying out their job and would you link that to a common
definition with what the secret service agencies do or do you think that police have
their own form of intelligence gathering that's sort of a different intent obviously you have
different purpose one is international or different reason for it do you have a view on that
that would be something that the police would need to work through themselves for their own
purposes i think and and work up some proposals for our potential legislative amendment to the
bill okay one more question on then i'll go to camilla um we've also heard and submissions
earlier today around the need or the sorry the right to have um videos or whatever information
that's been collected maybe under surveillance to be deleted uh there's doesn't seem to be any rules
perhaps it's going to come in regulation do you have a view around whether there should be a
mandatory requirement or you have a right to be able to see what's on file obviously that then
becomes subject to criminals actually trying to stop something held but how would you see the
balance of that that right to delete material that isn't relevant versus the ability of
keeping these in at the safe well mr chair and under the current privacy act provisions
everybody has through information privacy principle nine the ability to ask why information is
being retained there is a retention provision which says that information shouldn't be kept for
longer than than it's needed or there's a reasonable reason to keep it i think
that one of the challenges with the provisions in part one is that as i say it displaces the
effects of the privacy act it also displaces that principle there are good reasons not to retain
information you don't need one obviously the rights of new zealanders second more information you
retain the costly it is to keep that information and third the more information you hold as we've
seen with a number of privacy breaches and both the public and private sector the more risk there
is that that information could be taken in a cyber attack so there is strong public policy reasons
for having a retention in erasure principle being applying to to information committed in the space
chose anything we want to say on rights to erasure in that space just to yeah affirm what you're
saying commissioner that the right to deletion and and the principle about accurate and up-to-date
information are important data protection principles so while the framework needs to enable
police to retain what it needs to retain the framework also needs to have flexibility just to
discard the information particularly under a very broad authorization there needs to be an ability
to discard the information that police do not need to retain so that the intelligence being
retained is useful and fruitful intelligence not simply scooping up a lot of information
that turns out not in fact to be particularly useful and is information about New Zealand citizens
and and visitors okay cool right come in thank you and thank you very much for your
substantive submission and for your discussion with the committee I just had two questions
and just wanting to really understand your submission to us the first is is it your
submission that there needs to be a law change following the tamifuna case and the second
question is you've talked about the risk of possible legal challenges if the law is to
proceed as it is currently outlined in this bill is it your view that there is an increased
risk with this legislation or that simply it remains unclear because of the lack of detail
which has been traversed a bit already today thank you
I'll start with the second first the risk of possible legal challenges I think I said in my
opening remarks that you can't very easily legislate away the power of the court system
that is the purpose of the court system after all to interpret the law in relation to certain
facts situations Joe is anything more you want to say on that particular point
um I think that the our submission and our submission reflects some of the underlying
messages from the joint OPC IPCA report and the tamifuna decision which is to say that
the bill really only deals with half the problem it deals with the point of
collection of information by police but the messages from the joint report and from tamifuna
we're really saying that you have to consider intelligence gathering within the full life
cycle of the use of that information and its retention and it's in this this increasingly
intensified technological progress where that information is going into data network
databases for analysis and insight and so on so really the message from the tamifuna court
and if you think about what his honor justice coach was saying he was really inviting parliament
to create a clear framework not just about the authorization for police but about retention use
and destruction of information and so our perspective is that without addressing that
side of the equation um which is useful for the system it's useful for police to provide
greater certainty without that part of the equation the safeguards there's likely still
to be scope for the for information gathering to be challenged within the courts and for the
courts to have a look at that under the um the privacy settings which are embedded legally within
the privacy act the search and surveillance act and the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
all right hey we have to bring it to a close um but thank you for your submission a weighty
submission there's obviously Todd asked some specific stuff and I've asked for some other stuff
we'd appreciate if you were able to help the committee us do the deliberations around
those aspects so if you could come back to us that'd be very helpful but I want to thank you all for
coming through this morning and um giving you all thoughts thank you mr. chair thank you
members uh yes if there are any further uh questions uh very happy uh to respond to them
through your advisors to the committee and and we haven't covered everything that was asked by
miss billy all right thank you now members we're going to go into private um session
just briefly if you want to transfer it thank you everyone